Submission #21: What am I waiting for? Energy and Performance Optimization on big.LITTLE
Architectures: A Memory-latency Aware Approach
================================================================================================

Authors
-------
1. Willy Wolff <w.wolff@lancaster.ac.uk> (Lancaster University)
2. Barry Porter <b.f.porter@lancaster.ac.uk> (Lancaster University)

Abstract
--------
The energy demands of modern mobile devices have driven a trend towards
heterogeneous multi-core systems which include various types of core
tuned for performance or energy efficiency, offering a rich optimization
space for software. The downside of including powerful processors for
performance is heat generation. Due to the small factor design of mobile
devices, it is generally not possible to include an active cooling
system. As such, thermal management relies on a mix between frequency
scaling mechanisms and scheduling approaches to limit heat generation.
In the context of heterogeneous multi-core systems where processor
performance varies, scheduling decisions become tremendously difficult.
In addition to this, data coherency between heterogeneous processors is
automatically ensured by an interconnect; performance
of this interconnect, and by extension of the entire multi-core system,
is highly dependent on the software's memory access characteristics and
on the set of frequencies of each processor, adding more complexity to
both scheduling and frequency scaling decisions.

Existing frequency scaling and scheduling approaches do not consider
memory interaction between the different processors through the
interconnect and its associated latency, and so fail to achieve a
holistically good decision in such a versatile environment.

Our research provides a deep insight into the memory subsystem hierarchy
of a heterogeneous multi-core system and its timing behavior relative to
application characteristics, scheduling, and frequency scaling. We
propose a new adaptive frequency scaling governor that does consider the
memory subsystem latency; our solution uses a simple trained hardware
model of cache interconnect characteristics, along with real-time
hardware monitors, to continually adjust core frequencies to maximize
system performance. Evaluation of our governor on the Exynos5422 SoC, as
used in the Samsung Galaxy S5, demonstrates that our approach achieves a
speedup of more than 40\%, and a 70\% energy saving on a real-world
application. Representative applications of general mobile device use
are also tested using web-browsing and video decoding benchmarks.


